Luis, we have analyzed the different
sources of funding that
startups use in The Power
MBA, but we were focusing
on the application
of capital.
We've talked about how to make a
capital application with the Frames,
Fools and Family, with a venture
capital, with Business Angels,
etc.
But I would like you to tell us
that you have a slightly broader
perspective on what are the different
formulas and in some cases
from the point of view
also legal to which a startup
can resort to funding,
to finance the growth
of investments.
Yes of course.
I think it is probably
a matter of culture.
We have a culture in which we
are accustomed directly when we are
looking for a way to get more
resources to be able to devote
them to our business and
directly seek investors.
This is due to lack of financial culture
or the assimilation of environments.
But there are many ways in
which they are interesting
again, always depending
on what level or time
your company is.
For example, banking,
which so denostated and
so long.
Now it may be a good option.
In fact, there are already many banks
that are starting to generate
specific instruments only for
startups.
It seems that banking,
it seems that startups do
not even ask.
Yes, because traditionally a
startup for its growth
moment, which are usually
very early moments.
It is a regular and regular company
that is funded like everyone else.
But initially it's always difficult
because your bank rating is
always very bad.
Because you have few resources,
you have a lot of expenses, you will
have losses for 1, 2, 3, 4 years.
I would say that from the point
of view of the founders, if the
risk is very high, fund with bank
financing projects that have
a very high risk, endorsed by
your personal wealth, because
of course, it is a formula
with an excessive risk for
the founder.
And especially because there
is an uncertainty component that
is not in other.
You have no idea what you will
need or how your company will
be in 2 or 3 years.
However, I say, there are more and
more banking entities that have
that sensitivity a little special
and have elements to evaluate
you as a company in a different
way.
Even often without having personal
guarantees or simply with the
business guarantee.
Of course, I thought it once, the
banks are paving you on this or are
losing the participation in the
companies that are growing most,
which will grow more in the
coming years.
It is, it is so.
In fact, many banks have already
installed not only vehicles
to invest, forgive me,
to finance companies through
loans and policies, but
also have their own
instruments to directly
invest companies.
It makes all sense, it makes
all sense.
And I agree with you in the
analysis that you are missing
out on a chance to make a
lot more profitable money
than you would have with
a loan at 3%.
The companies that are going to grow.
Well, then we have seen
bank financing, we have capital
expansions that is what we
have what we have learned
so far and that I will
later ask you to do us an
analysis of how the capital
expansion process really
works.
Are there other formulas that
can be used?
Yes, there are loans profiles that
can be between individuals or also
with public or banking entities
such as participatory loans
or convertible loans, the
mythical convertible notes
that we already know that come from
in the tournament of Oaxacón,
which have a specific regime
in those countries.
For example, a convertible
loan is a loan that is ultimately
a normal and consistent loan.
The only thing you are linking
or allowing the person who contributes
that money in some way then
becomes a partner under
a specific condition.
This is a very very very very practical
and very very good instrument
that we are increasingly seeing
in investment rounds.
When they are bigger rounds, than
the typical very initial round,
Friendful and Family, as you
were before, or in the sit phase,
in which you are somehow leaving
people who enter before with a discount
or with specific conditions in
exchange for you to bring the
money with a loan long before
the closing moment.
Well, that is, we are in the
process of a round that will
take a few months and let's say
that the notes or convertible
loans, as you said, is an instrument
that allows the first investors,
who in this case are lenders
but end up being partners, to
enter at that prior moment
before they close the round
with a discount on the valuation
on the valuation in
which they close is exactly
that and always becomes
capital or not.
That is the trick.
There are a couple of tricks that
are very important to consider, especially
from the perspective of the entrepreneur
or the person who is looking
for financing.
The first is that there must be
a time limit and conditions
to convert.
We have met many companies
that have...
I have a period of up to two years
in which the person who puts
the money to the lender, the
lender, can decide whether
or not to convert.
That in practice is killing you
any round of investment throughout
that period, because any
investor that comes later
first will dilute you.
You don't know if it will
be a loan or a capital.
I will put 50 million in your company
but I don't know if you're going to
spend it to repay a loan from a day
earlier or is someone who a clear
advice is that the convertible
note has to have first a
period that is fixed, that
it's not too long and that then
it will be converted yes or
yes.
Well, the advice is that the
faculty to convert is tassed beforehand.
That is, that I as an entrepreneur,
as a person who receives that
funding, I have the ability
at certain times to say, hear, look,
I give you 15 days to decide
whether to invest, whether it
is capital or not capital.
Because otherwise, if it is a completely
open period and only depends
on the investor, you find yourself
generating uncertainty
to the rest of investors.
Exactly, it generates uncertainty to
the latter, even to the entrepreneur
himself who vetoes the possibility
of being able to continue
raising capital precisely for
that uncertainty.
We have already talked about a
convertible loan or a convertible loan.
and exact.
The participatory loan, which
is a term that I think many people
hear, can you explain
how it works?
Yes, I think that when we talk about
participatory loan everyone
has in their mind ENISA, which
is a fantastic entity that has
really helped a lot to the development
and growth of this
sector.
It is true that the ratio of non-payments
from Spanish companies to ENISA,
less than entrepreneurs and
startups, is unfortunately
quite high.
Do you know him?
I don't have the number, but we
have a lot of companies, a lot
of customers who also, because
of lack of culture or preparation,
consider that a participatory
loan, which is true that the
conditions are legally very
good, is a subordinate
loan that has a number of conditions
that allow you to have
your own funds bigger in
the face of a...
That is what I would like to explain.
What exactly or generally
consists of a participatory loan?
A participatory loan is
a loan, it is the one that
enters your company.
What happens is that it has
a feature first that subordinate,
it is the last one to pay, with
which in the face of your investors
is well to have that loan.
And precisely for that reason,
by that special legal regime, what
you do is that in case your
company is in the case
of dissolution, that is, that
your own funds are below half
of the social capital at
some point, this is counted
as part of your own funds.
It makes them bigger, so it keeps
you away from the moment
of dissolution, right?
So, with this small margin, it is
true that then, for example, if
you want to anticipate the repayment
of that loan, you have to make
a capital reduction.
There are a number of additional
conditions, but to very large
features, which I would like
to be clear.
The participatory loan, the most
interesting thing is that if you
are a company, you have a message
of spending that money, because otherwise
you do not ask, logically,
it allows you, say, a little
more life, because it makes
your own funds a little bigger.
It is not considered only as
debt, but is considered to be
part of it for the purposes
of dissolution.
It is a kind of mixed figure,
well, correct if I am wrong, mixed
figure between own funds
and foreign funds.
and exact.
And also, as I have understood,
there is a participatory interest,
that is, the lender can
participate with certain
formulas of profits,
billing, etc., which is fixed
on the company's results.
It is a loan.
Yes, but...
Did you take a loan?
I mean, yes, I understand the concept,
but let's say that in your balance sheet
it will be exactly the same as a loan
and you don't have dividends,
you don't have dividend rights, you
don't have political rights.
That is, in practice only is that
the subordinate character, the
fact that it is not as demanding
as the rest of loans, allows
you to form part of your
own funds.
It is a figure that is
not interesting to the lender,
to the person who grants
it to you.
That is why the profile of people
who grant participatory loans
is usually people from public
entities, or some banks have also
done so, or venture capital
funds that are interested in
growth, and make participatory
loans convertible.
Well, indeed yes is.
Then there is another topic that
is not inherent to participatory
loan, but that in many cases, as in
the EISA has been given, and that is
very important to take into account
from the perspective of the founders,
and is that in many occasions
the entities that grant the
participatory loan do not request
to VALES, that is, the guarantees
are smaller that they request,
then that is very very favourable
for him, for the founders.
Of course, as long as you can
get a funding where you don't
have to compromise your personal
wealth, it's always much
better.
Especially when we deal with
these margin uncertainty
so big, you don't know where they'
re going to be in two or three
years, and you do this somehow
to drive the company to
early stages in which you
expect to get to a point,
you already know what excels
are here for, for a little, unfortunately,
or fortunately.
To deceive you.
Exactly, to fool you, or to
have a route sheet, then you
already know that it is not
met, as it is to update it
repeatedly, but it is true
that this is a tip that serves
for any form of funding.
If the degree of uncertainty is
very large, you will try to play
your personal wealth, and then
there are mechanisms also via partnership,
or through other instruments
to guarantee or maintain
some protection over your
wealth power.
That is.
Well, basically this is
what we are saying, the reason
why start-ups go, that is,
the main financing
formula are capital expansions
mainly for this, because so
there is no obligation
to return it.
and exact.
So you're diluting, you're losing
part of your company, but
you're not compromising your wealth.
Well, we have spoken about
bank financing, we have spoken
about capital expansion, we have
spoken about convertible
notes, participatory
loans, but I think there are
more formulas than new ones.
Yes, first of all, a couple of
years ago the participatory investment
law was passed.
In some way, they are instruments
such as crowdfunding, which
allow you, say, to open a lot
of the scope of the investment
profiles that can enter your
company.
When you think of someone who invests,
you are traditionally looking for
someone with some experience, with
a fortune that can invest 15,
20, 30, 50,000 euros, it is a concept
of Business Angel that you have
already tried.
However, there is a profile
of small investors who can equally
invest 1,000, 1,500 euros to identify
their small portfolio and
this people can access through
crowdfunding, which is well
developed in many countries.
How does crowdfunding work?
Crowdfunding is a platform that,
as we call it, participatory investment,
where people can access, you propose
your project and you say,
look, I want to get 150,000 of
1,000, 2 million of 2X, and
anyone can make small contributions
that by bringing them
together, say, you end up
having many more partners
in that case.
They are all united like the Sauron
ring, they are all united through
a hard partnership that allows to
trade unions, not with one entity,
but through agreements to everyone
so that they are aligned with
each other and have at least
one representative.
You imagine what it is to manage
a company, make calls, amendment
of partnership agreements with
200, 300 partners.
The captive is mad.
That is, an entrepreneur has a
project, he ups it up to a platform
like Startup Explore, for example,
and there are thousands of
people who are investors within
Startup Explore, who can be
small investors.
Then a small ticket is set, I imagine,
1,000 euros, 2,000, I don't know,
whatever, and a round is closed
or part of a round is financed
with the contributions
of those people and they enter
the society through an extension
of capital.
and exact.
This, initially, models like,
for example, the Startup Explore
when it was set up at first,
seem to me much more interesting.
What happens is that the law vetoed
this, that it was the investment
through what is called a SPV, a
Special Purpose Vehicle, a special
or special purpose investment
vehicle, that we only
assembled this company to be
the sole partner of this
other company.
Well, and that's what works in other
countries, right?
of course.
A company is created at that
time that is the one that enters
the Startup, the capital of
the Startup, and that society
is participated by all small investors.
Exactly, then, say, act with
one voice and one representation.
And here it does not work that way.
It is specifically prohibited by
law.
In Spain, this does not work.
Yes, it is a pity, because really, from
my point of view, and this is an opinion,
of course, it makes it very
easy to have one only interlocutor,
that is, one single legal person who
is your partner, instead of dozens
or hundreds of people who can have
their opinion, their voice,
no matter how much trade
unions that are via partners' pact.
Well, we have students from dozens of
countries, so, simply, the important
thing is that they understand the
concept of crowdfunding
and that they evaluate how it
works with agile.
Exactly, in each country,
obviously, it is different, especially
in all Anglo-Saxon countries, it
is very common that there
is the possibility to invest
jointly through a single vehicle.
And I, for me, of course, is a very
big advantage the countries that
can do so, of course, that I see
a little that way.
We also talked about a last
formula.
ICOs are the initial
coin offerings.
They are mechanisms that are
very much a bird's eye, which allows
you to tokenize certain assets,
tokenize means giving or isolating,
say, within your company,
for example, a result account,
or an asset, a way of
income, even...
to isolate.
Isolate it, or even a right to buy
something within your company,
as it happens with Kickstarter
or with this type of crowdfunding
more of product.
So what you do is say, I'm going
to launch a token, a virtual
currency, associated with a
particular product or business
line, or a right to buy a
product within my company.
Then, at the end, that same, I divide
it, that unit, that token, I divide
it into many small...
You value that unit, right?
and exact.
You value it or, in some way, you distribute
the value of what the future may
have, because you don't know how
much that future will be worth.
Well, yes, you value it with the method
you want, but if it's a current asset, that is,
if it's an asset that's in the market,
then it's a real asset.
and exact.
You usually do not look for it, you do
not look for it.
Yes, there are even, look, there
are ICOs that are based on real estate
themes, right?
This house, the tokenize.
I think that will clarify
us more.
How would it actually work?
Look, there are many more, but we
will put a concrete example, which
would be, I will buy an immovable,
this immovable, let's say that
the value of that immovable, tokenize
it, divide it into thousands
or even millions of small
shares of cents or euros,
right?
So I buy a percentage of
the value of this property.
The day it sells, I will have access
to it.
What is the good thing
about tokenizing these assets
or rights?
That's that, apart from the secondary
market, that in itself also
generates a lot of liquidity to
the system, so that I have a way
to acquire something that I can
then sell again.
That is the concept of tokenizing,
let's say that we're going to hear
more and more about economics, and
that's the possibility of isolating
the value of something, which is from
my heritage, and sharing it within
a series of people...
It is divided into...
So what are you sharing?
What title do you share?
It is a token, it is a currency,
a small cryptocurrency that is in
the end a token, it is a fraction
of that value, which in itself has
a value, and has a value, and
in addition it is subject to
a secondary market, with which it
can be sold, bought and sold.
Interestingly, I imagine that this
for now will be residual, that is,
there will be few companies that...
Well, last year more than $300
million in the world already moved,
that is, I don't know if in 300 or
30, it was a very large amount,
now I don't remember the figure,
but it's a model that has the disadvantage
that it's not regulated, because
they're not stocks, they're not
securities that are subject to regulation,
with which you can imagine the
volatility it has, but the advantage
is that it's very flexible and
that allows you to scale
companies much faster, and
that always taking into account
the risk, which is important.
Well, to finish this class, I will
make a look at all the formulas
you have talked about.
You have started talking
about banking financing, which is
the formula that companies have been
using throughout their lives,
but it is true that in the world
of start-up, because of
the great uncertainty that
there is, since usually entrepreneurs
prefer, not only entrepreneurs
prefer to opt for other formulas,
but banks have not
been willing to enter
until now.
We have talked about capital expansions,
which is the most common formula,
which recours to Business
Angels, Venture Capital, Friendfuls
of Family, etc.
You've talked about convertible
notes, which are usually a temporary
instrument in the extension
rounds.
You have talked about participatory
loans, which have been granted
by public entities
so far, usually, right?
We talk about crowdfunding,
platforms like Start-up Explorer,
for example, that allows many
small investors to enter
your company, which until
now is impossible.
And finally, talk about something
that is much more innovative,
new, than ICOs.
What is the acronym of...?
Initial Coin Offering, as an initial
coin offer.
Well, in that case yes.
Exactly, it comes a little to change that
is something that everyone sounds like
something more based on cryptocurrencies.
Well, of cryptocurrencies, which
is something, as we can understand,
very new, but that you already say
that they have moved more than $300 million.
I did 300 or 30.
It was a lot of money, I had done
a little.
Well, so is great.
Many thanks.